README.md, before:

#  VEX (Vulkan Early eXperiences)
![Vex logo rendered in engine](/RepoStuff/RenderedLogo.png)
A game engine built with Vulkan that aims to replicate the feel of PS1-era games. The main goal of this project is to learn graphics programming without the complexity of PBR and other modern techniques, while still building something visually appealing.
![Vex screen_shot_low_res](/RepoStuff/VEX_SS_LOWRES.png)

## Current Project State:
### PS1-style graphics with the ability to enable and disable specific features
![ObjectTest release build 03-10-2025](/RepoStuff/VEX_Release.gif)

### Built-in ImGui, error handling, and debugging tools for debug builds
![ObjectTest debug build 03-10-2025](/RepoStuff/VEX_Debug.gif)

### Custom asset packing system with support for auto-registered custom classes
![ObjectTest debug build and build tools 03-10-2025](/RepoStuff/VEX_features.gif)

## Engine Systems
- Custom Input System: Flexible input handling supporting multiple input methods and devices
- Virtual File System: Abstracted file access supporting virtual paths, with ability to load normal files
- Transform Hierarchy: Proper object parenting with hierarchical transformation system
- Object/ECS System Hybrid: Similarly to Unreals Actor system here you can create Object c++ classes with its own components
- Custom UI system: Json based UI system using facebook/yoga layout engine.

## Other Notes
- Current builds are early in development and represent basic functionality
- Currently mostly tested on Linux with AMD GPUs (both discrete and integrated), Windows builds are now possible but not every merge is tested for windows compatibility.
- An editor is planned, but requires a working engine core to do so

## Engine documentation
Engine documentation can be found under: https://odevu.github.io/VEX/
It can also be regenerated locally by using doxygen.

There are also code sample avaiable for creating in engine projects: https://odevu.github.io/VEX/samples/

## Building the Project (Curently you build engine with a project)
This guide provides the necessary steps for setting up your environment, compiling the custom build tools, and finally compiling the project itself.

---

### Dependencies
You must install all the following dependencies for your specific operating system before proceeding.

#### Windows Requirements
| Tool | Recommended Installation | Notes |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Git** | Standard installer. | Used for version control and managing submodules. |
| **CMake** | Official Windows x64 Installer. | The project configuration tool. **Ensure it is added to your System `PATH`** during installation. |
| **Ninja-build** | `winget install Ninja-build.Ninja` | A fast build system generator. |
| **Clang** (LLVM) | `winget install -e --id LLVM.LLVM` | The required C++ compiler. You need **7-Zip** for the installation to succeed. Remember to add the Clang binaries to your `PATH`: `C:\Program Files\LLVM\bin`. |
| **Windows SDK** | Install via the **Visual Studio 2022 Installer**. | Provides essential system headers and libraries. |
| **Vulkan SDK** | Download from the **[LunarG website](https://www.lunarg.com/vulkan-sdk/)**. | Must include the **Validation Layers**. Other headers (`glm`, `SDL`, `volk`) are already included as submodules, so you don't need to install their SDK versions. |

---

#### Linux Requirements
| Tool | Notes |
| :--- | :--- |
| **cmake** | Standard package manager installation. |
| **ninja-build** | Standard package manager installation. |
| **clang** | The required C++ compiler. |
| **Vulkan SDK** | Standard package manager installation (with validation layers). |
| **System Libraries** | Additional libraries, primarily for **Wayland** and **X11** display support, are also required. A full list will be documented soon. |

---

### Build Steps

#### 1. Build the Building Tools
The engine uses a custom compilation utility called **`ProjectBuilder`**. You must build this tool first.

1.  Navigate to the **`Engine/BuildTools`** directory in your terminal.
2.  Run the script for your platform:
    * **Windows:** `build-windows.bat`
    * **Linux:** `./build-linux.sh`

Upon successful completion, the `ProjectBuilder` executable will be placed in the **`Engine/BuildTools/build`** directory.

---

#### 2. Build Your Project
Use the compiled `ProjectBuilder` to build your game project.

You need to provide the tool with the path to your project's root folder and specify the build type.

##### Usage
```bash
# Example for Windows (Debug Mode):
.\Engine\BuildTools\build\ProjectBuilder.exe C:\Path\To\MyProject -d

# Example for Linux (Release Mode):
./Engine/BuildTools/build/ProjectBuilder /path/to/MyProject -r
```

| Argument | Description |
| :--- | :--- |
| **< path >** | The absolute path to your project's root directory. |
| **-d** | Compiles the project in Debug mode (for development and debugging). |
| **-r** | Compiles the project in Release mode (optimized for final deployment). |

## TODO:
### Must haves to create games:
- Billboard rendering
- Particle system
- Support for animated 3D models
### Should be implemented but can make games without:
- Vertex colors for models (for AO or fog effects)
- Vertex lighting implementation
### Things that will make me happy but wont help me do games:
- Frustum culling
- offscreen rendering (to a texture for example, with support for multiple render targets)
- Better shader pipeline

## Liblaries use by engine:
All liblaries are included as git submodules. Their respective licenses may differ from engine license but all of them are on some sort of opensource license.

- [SDL3](https://github.com/libsdl-org/SDL/)
- [Vulkan Memory Allocator](https://github.com/GPUOpen-LibrariesAndSDKs/VulkanMemoryAllocator/)
- [Volk](https://github.com/zeux/volk/)
- [glm](https://github.com/g-truc/glm/)
- [assimp](https://github.com/assimp/assimp)
- [cpptrace](https://github.com/jeremy-rifkin/cpptrace)
- [entt](https://github.com/skypjack/entt)
- [Dear ImGui](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui)
- [nlohmann/json](https://github.com/nlohmann/json/)
- [yoga](https://github.com/facebook/yoga)

Commit message:

Renderer: Moved Shaders to Slang
Cmake still suports glsl for prototyping or using ready shaders. New Slang shaders are module based to be more readable, thats tbh the only reason why i did move to new shading language.

README.md, after:

#  VEX (Vulkan Early eXperiences)
![Vex logo rendered in engine](/RepoStuff/RenderedLogo.png)
A game engine built with Vulkan that aims to replicate the feel of PS1-era games. The main goal of this project is to learn graphics programming without the complexity of PBR and other modern techniques, while still building something visually appealing.
![Vex screen_shot_low_res](/RepoStuff/VEX_SS_LOWRES.png)

## Current Project State:
### PS1-style graphics with the ability to enable and disable specific features
![ObjectTest release build 03-10-2025](/RepoStuff/VEX_Release.gif)

### Built-in ImGui, error handling, and debugging tools for debug builds
![ObjectTest debug build 03-10-2025](/RepoStuff/VEX_Debug.gif)

### Custom asset packing system with support for auto-registered custom classes
![ObjectTest debug build and build tools 03-10-2025](/RepoStuff/VEX_features.gif)

## Engine Systems
- Custom Input System: Flexible input handling supporting multiple input methods and devices
- Virtual File System: Abstracted file access supporting virtual paths, with ability to load normal files
- Transform Hierarchy: Proper object parenting with hierarchical transformation system
- Object/ECS System Hybrid: Similarly to Unreals Actor system here you can create Object c++ classes with its own components
- Custom UI system: Json based UI system using facebook/yoga layout engine.

## Other Notes
- Current builds are early in development and represent basic functionality
- Currently mostly tested on Linux with AMD GPUs (both discrete and integrated), Windows builds are now possible but not every merge is tested for windows compatibility.
- An editor is planned, but requires a working engine core to do so

## Engine documentation
Engine documentation can be found under: https://odevu.github.io/VEX/
It can also be regenerated locally by using doxygen.

There are also code sample avaiable for creating in engine projects: https://odevu.github.io/VEX/samples/

## Building the Project (Curently you build engine with a project)
This guide provides the necessary steps for setting up your environment, compiling the custom build tools, and finally compiling the project itself.

---

### Dependencies
You must install all the following dependencies for your specific operating system before proceeding.

#### Windows Requirements
| Tool | Recommended Installation | Notes |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Git** | Standard installer. | Used for version control and managing submodules. |
| **CMake** | Official Windows x64 Installer. | The project configuration tool. **Ensure it is added to your System `PATH`** during installation. |
| **Ninja-build** | `winget install Ninja-build.Ninja` | A fast build system generator. |
| **Clang** (LLVM) | `winget install -e --id LLVM.LLVM` | The required C++ compiler. You need **7-Zip** for the installation to succeed. Remember to add the Clang binaries to your `PATH`: `C:\Program Files\LLVM\bin`. |
| **Windows SDK** | Install via the **Visual Studio 2022 Installer**. | Provides essential system headers and libraries. |
| **Vulkan SDK** | Download from the **[LunarG website](https://www.lunarg.com/vulkan-sdk/)**. | Must include the **Validation Layers**. Other headers (`glm`, `SDL`, `volk`) are already included as submodules, so you don't need to install their SDK versions. |
| **SlangC** | Make sure to select it during VulkanSDK installation. | Required for shader compilation. |

---

#### Linux Requirements
| Tool | Notes |
| :--- | :--- |
| **cmake** | Standard package manager installation. |
| **ninja-build** | Standard package manager installation. |
| **clang** | The required C++ compiler. |
| **Vulkan SDK** | Standard package manager installation (with validation layers). |
| **slangc** | extranct from vulkan sdk tarball |
| **System Libraries** | Additional libraries, primarily for **Wayland** and **X11** display support, are also required. A full list will be documented soon. |

---

### Build Steps

#### 1. Build the Building Tools
The engine uses a custom compilation utility called **`ProjectBuilder`**. You must build this tool first.

1.  Navigate to the **`Engine/BuildTools`** directory in your terminal.
2.  Run the script for your platform:
    * **Windows:** `build-windows.bat`
    * **Linux:** `./build-linux.sh`

Upon successful completion, the `ProjectBuilder` executable will be placed in the **`Engine/BuildTools/build`** directory.

---

#### 2. Build Your Project
Use the compiled `ProjectBuilder` to build your game project.

You need to provide the tool with the path to your project's root folder and specify the build type.

##### Usage
```bash
# Example for Windows (Debug Mode):
.\Engine\BuildTools\build\ProjectBuilder.exe C:\Path\To\MyProject -d

# Example for Linux (Release Mode):
./Engine/BuildTools/build/ProjectBuilder /path/to/MyProject -r
```

| Argument | Description |
| :--- | :--- |
| **< path >** | The absolute path to your project's root directory. |
| **-d** | Compiles the project in Debug mode (for development and debugging). |
| **-r** | Compiles the project in Release mode (optimized for final deployment). |

## TODO:
### Must haves to create games:
- Billboard rendering
- Particle system
- Support for animated 3D models
### Should be implemented but can make games without:
- Vertex colors for models (for AO or fog effects)
- Vertex lighting implementation
### Things that will make me happy but wont help me do games:
- Frustum culling
- offscreen rendering (to a texture for example, with support for multiple render targets)
- Better shader pipeline

## Liblaries use by engine:
All liblaries are included as git submodules. Their respective licenses may differ from engine license but all of them are on some sort of opensource license.

- [SDL3](https://github.com/libsdl-org/SDL/)
- [Vulkan Memory Allocator](https://github.com/GPUOpen-LibrariesAndSDKs/VulkanMemoryAllocator/)
- [Volk](https://github.com/zeux/volk/)
- [glm](https://github.com/g-truc/glm/)
- [assimp](https://github.com/assimp/assimp)
- [cpptrace](https://github.com/jeremy-rifkin/cpptrace)
- [entt](https://github.com/skypjack/entt)
- [Dear ImGui](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui)
- [nlohmann/json](https://github.com/nlohmann/json/)
- [yoga](https://github.com/facebook/yoga)
